docs/configuring-rumqttd.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 - 2024 MDAD project contributors
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 - 2024 Slavi Pantaleev
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 Aaron Raimist
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 Chris van Dijk
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 Dominik Zajac
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 Mickaël Cornière
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 François Darveau
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Julian Foad
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Warren Bailey
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Antonis Christofides
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Felix Stupp
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Julian-Samuel Gebühr
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Pierre 'McFly' Marty
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2024 - 2025 Suguru Hirahara

SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-or-later
-->

# Setting up rumqttd

This is an [Ansible](https://www.ansible.com/) role which installs [rumqttd](https://github.com/bytebeamio/rumqtt) to run as a [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) container wrapped in a systemd service.

rumqttd is a high performance, embeddable [MQTT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MQTT) broker.

See the project's [documentation](https://github.com/bytebeamio/rumqtt/blob/main/README.md) to learn what rumqtt does and why it might be useful to you.

## Adjusting the playbook configuration

To enable rumqttd with this role, add the following configuration to your `vars.yml` file.

```yaml
########################################################################
#                                                                      #
# rumqttd                                                              #
#                                                                      #
########################################################################

rumqttd_enabled: true

########################################################################
#                                                                      #
# /rumqttd                                                             #
#                                                                      #
########################################################################
```

### Change the MQTT port (optional)

If you need to change the MQTT port, add the following configuration to your `vars.yml` file (adapt to your needs).

```yaml
rumqttd_container_http_host_bind_port: "1884"
```

## Installing

After configuring the playbook, run the installation command of your playbook as below:

```sh
ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts setup.yml --tags=setup-all,start
```

If you use the MASH playbook, the shortcut commands with the [`just` program](https://github.com/mother-of-all-self-hosting/mash-playbook/blob/main/docs/just.md) are also available: `just install-all` or `just setup-all`

## Usage

After running the command for installation, you can start to send and subscribe to MQTT topics. Use port `1883` and the servers IP or any domain you configured to point at this server.

## Troubleshooting

### Check the service's logs

You can find the logs in [systemd-journald](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd-journald.service.html) by logging in to the server with SSH and running `journalctl -fu rumqttd` (or how you/your playbook named the service, e.g. `mash-rumqttd`).

## Alternatives

[Mosquitto](https://mosquitto.org/) is another, more feature-complete MQTT broker. The role for it is available [here](https://github.com/mother-of-all-self-hosting/ansible-role-mosquitto).

Commit message:

Enable pre-commit
Reuse https://github.com/mother-of-all-self-hosting/ansible-role-convertx/commit/f138330ec60c81f2e61156f72d21d20e9d040c14.

Signed-off-by: Suguru Hirahara <acioustick@noreply.codeberg.org>

docs/configuring-rumqttd.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 - 2024 MDAD project contributors
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 - 2024 Slavi Pantaleev
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 Aaron Raimist
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 Chris van Dijk
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 Dominik Zajac
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 Mickaël Cornière
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 François Darveau
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Julian Foad
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Warren Bailey
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Antonis Christofides
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Felix Stupp
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Julian-Samuel Gebühr
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Pierre 'McFly' Marty
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2024 - 2025 Suguru Hirahara

SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-or-later
-->

# Setting up rumqttd

This is an [Ansible](https://www.ansible.com/) role which installs [rumqttd](https://github.com/bytebeamio/rumqtt) to run as a [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) container wrapped in a systemd service.

rumqttd is a high performance, embeddable [MQTT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MQTT) broker.

See the project's [documentation](https://github.com/bytebeamio/rumqtt/blob/main/README.md) to learn what rumqtt does and why it might be useful to you.

## Adjusting the playbook configuration

To enable rumqttd with this role, add the following configuration to your `vars.yml` file.

```yaml
########################################################################
#                                                                      #
# rumqttd                                                              #
#                                                                      #
########################################################################

rumqttd_enabled: true

########################################################################
#                                                                      #
# /rumqttd                                                             #
#                                                                      #
########################################################################
```

### Change the MQTT port (optional)

If you need to change the MQTT port, add the following configuration to your `vars.yml` file (adapt to your needs).

```yaml
rumqttd_container_http_host_bind_port: "1884"
```

## Installing

After configuring the playbook, run the installation command of your playbook as below:

```sh
ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts setup.yml --tags=setup-all,start
```

If you use the MASH playbook, the shortcut commands with the [`just` program](https://github.com/mother-of-all-self-hosting/mash-playbook/blob/main/docs/just.md) are also available: `just install-all` or `just setup-all`

## Usage

After running the command for installation, you can start to send and subscribe to MQTT topics. Use port `1883` and the servers IP or any domain you configured to point at this server.

## Troubleshooting

### Check the service's logs

You can find the logs in [systemd-journald](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd-journald.service.html) by logging in to the server with SSH and running `journalctl -fu rumqttd` (or how you/your playbook named the service, e.g. `mash-rumqttd`).

## Alternatives

[Mosquitto](https://mosquitto.org/) is another, more feature-complete MQTT broker. The role for it is available at [this repository](https://github.com/mother-of-all-self-hosting/ansible-role-mosquitto) maintained by the [Mother-of-All-Self-Hosting (MASH)](https://github.com/mother-of-all-self-hosting) team.
